# Spending patterns exposed: relating country differences in budget expenditure to socio-economic indicators
All sovereign countries spread their public expenditure among different broad categories, like defence, health and education. However, each country may spend this money differently, prioritizing some budget items over others. The present project investigates whether we can group countries based on the way they allocate their budget expenditure, and whether those groups are meaningful in terms of predicting some socio-economic indicators. We tackled this problem by using machine learning techniques. While initial k-means clustering analysis did not give rise to meaningful expenditure-based country clusters, subsequent Principal Component Analysis (PCA) found that most budget expenditure variance could be explained by a reduced number of axes. The most important of them captured a trend where those countries that spent more on health and social protection also spent less on basic bureaucratic services. The value of each country on such principal component was highly correlated with its Human Development Index (HDI) value, and moderately correlated with the proportion of public employees over the total workforce. Specifically, countries spending more on health and social protection tended to be more developed and possessed more public employees. Overall, our results support that some socio-economic indicators can indeed be predicted by the way countries spend their budget.
